This week on the podcast, I get to sit
down with Jason Zweig and William
Bernstein remembering their friend
Jonathan Clements. Jonathan was a Wall
Street Journal personal finance
columnist and author for almost 20
years. He's beloved by those people in
the industry. In many ways Jonathan has
done as much
as anybody to push the idea of indexing,
at least anybody since Jack Bogle. I
thought this conversation despite the
fact that we know Jonathan received a
terminal diagnosis and we already know
how it ended. I thought this
conversation was interesting, uplifting,
and fascinating. I think you will also.
With no further ado, my remembrance of
Jonathan Clements with Jason Zweig and
William Bernstein.
Jason Zweig and Bill Bernstein, welcome
to Masters in Business.
>> Thanks, Barry.
>> Glad to be here.
>> So, let's start out with the beginning.
I want to I want to talk a little bit
about who Jonathan was. We'll talk about
his two most recent books, including the
one coming out in May of 2026,
but how did each of you meet Jonathan?
What were your early impressions of him
like? Let's start with you, Jason.
>> You want me to go first?
>> Yeah.
>> So,
uh Jonathan and I met uh the third week
of March in 1987
um
when I joined Forbes magazine and he was
already there.
And um we almost instantly became
good friends.
We I would say we
probably went out to lunch at least
twice a week for the next
4 years. Um
Certainly every Wednesday.
Fish cakes and spaghetti at the at the
New Courtney on 14th Street in
Manhattan. Um
>> That's right. The
the Forbes office is right over there on
>> Was.
>> 18th and 5th.
>> Yeah. Yeah, it was.
>> All the Fabergé eggs were there. The
whole The whole building was kind of
uniquely situated.
>> 5th Avenue and 12th Street. Yeah. Very
close.
And
um
uh Jonathan had a
he had a
really unusual sparkle.
Um he always had a twinkle in his eye.
He thought almost everything was funny.
Um because of course
almost everything is funny.
If you think about it the right way.
And um
you know, he might be writing about some
con artist who was stealing people's
money or some mutual fund that was
overcharging people. But
he always
found the the humor in in the situation
and I loved that about him.
And um
we were friends from that moment on ever
since.
>> Bill, how'd you meet Jonathan?
>> I met him a little later. Um wasn't
until about the mid-90s when I was still
practicing medicine and I was finding my
feet in finance and I was starting to
write and I did what any aspiring
financial writer does, which is you
start chatting up financial journalists.
Uh and uh he he responded and he started
quoting me on the journal and for many
years I was just a source
uh until you know, maybe the the
the late the early 2010s, the late
aughts.
Uh and then we became friends uh
personal friends after that and
you know, I he did think that everything
was funny and he he just had such a
pleasing personality. He had a high
hedonic set point. He was always in a
good mood. Uh and he always thought that
everything was funny, which is a
fabulous
uh combination. And the other personal
characteristic that he had, which which
just powered his career, I think, was
that he was
willing to talk about the hard things in
his life, his his struggles with money,
uh and, you know, he was willing to talk
about his divorces, and of course, in
the end, his impending demise. And so,
it was those three things together, I
think, uh
that really made him such a unique
financial journalist and human being.
>> So, when I was doing preparation for
this, I I learned a lot of things I was
wholly unaware of, including a quote
from you, Bill,
which was you owe your entire career in
investments to Jonathan's work. You have
to explain how a neurologist in North
Bend, Oregon, ended up having a career
change by a a personal finance
journalist.
>> Well, I happen to live in a country that
doesn't have a functioning uh social
safety net. And so, I realized I was
going to have to invest uh
on my own if I wanted to survive my
retirement financially. And so, I
approached it the way I thought anybody
with scientific training would do, which
is I
read the peer-reviewed literature, the
basic textbooks, uh and then I collected
data, and I built models. And when I was
done with all that, I had actually had
something that was useful to small
investors, and in a couple of instances,
even to professional uh
investors. And so, I started writing
about it. Uh the internet came to my
community about that time. I put the
stuff on the web, uh my material on the
web, and Jonathan
picked it up. And so, he started quoting
me in the in the uh
in the Wall Street Journal. And then,
that was that opened the door to getting
my books published, uh Uh,
and also to, you know, a financial
advisory business, as well. And so, it's
like a lot of a lot of things in a
complex life. It was just serendipity,
one thing leading to another.
>> Huh, really really interesting.
Jason, you're you're with Jonathan at
Forbes, and then you're together at The
Wall Street Journal, but I I'm struck by
1987 starting, not only the year of the
great crash,
uh, but long before indexing was the
dominant intellectual framework,
certainly in terms of money flows into
mutual funds and ETFs. Um, what was it
about Jonathan's writing that seemed to
reshape a lot of the conversation about
investment?
>> Well, I would say
I I don't think this is an exaggeration.
I would say more than any other
individual,
except Jack Bogle,
Jonathan put
index funds on, you know, front and
center for American investors.
And, you know, he realized very early
on,
um,
that
active management,
in the aggregate, was not earning its
keep. It was charging more
than it it could possibly deliver for
for clients.
And Jonathan realized, there's an
alternative.
And I'm going to
keep telling people that's what they
should do.
And he wrote he must have written
two or 300 columns telling people that
they should buy index funds.
And a lot of his readers, particularly
professional readers,
hated that.
Because he was essentially saying, don't
hire them.
You know, hire Vanguard or or State
Street or or another index fund
provider.
>> about the big three, the three biggest
mutual fund and ETF companies today
really derive the lion's share of their
assets, certainly half
at BlackRock and probably over half at
Vanguard.
>> Yep.
>> Um from index.
>> Yep. And
you know, you can you The math is not
hard to do. Um you know, investors have
saved hundreds of billions of dollars in
in superfluous
management fees by moving from active to
passive investing.
And Jonathan deserves a lot of credit
for that because
I can attest coming sort of coming to
it, I don't know, what would I say, two
or three years
uh behind him.
Um
the amount of hate mail I used to get
and hate phone calls.
Um
you know, it's it's not easy to tell
people
that they should not have a right to
make as good a living as they have been.
They don't like hearing that.
But if it's in
the best interest of the larger part of
your audience, that's the message you
have to deliver and that's that's the
choice Jonathan made really before any
other
investing or personal finance journalist
in the country. And once he made that
choice, he would not be moved.
>> I
>> Go ahead, Bill.
>> Yeah, I mean
fortune favors the prepared and I think
what prepared Jonathan for that was from
about what, 1990 to about 1994, he
covered mutual fund managers. And boy,
that's an awful sandbox to have to play
in because how do you get into that
sandbox? Well, you take a lot of risk
and you get lucky.
Uh and going forward, uh
the the track record is not so good. And
he saw that often enough that I I I
think it drove him to the conclusion
that Jason was just talking about.
>> Mhm.
I I think it was Professor French at
Dartmouth of Fama-French fame said it
takes about 20 years to figure out if a
fund manager is skillful or lucky.
Because two or three years of returns
certainly certainly doesn't tell us
anything.
>> has he has one example that that that
just stays in my memory, which is that
if you have a hedge fund manager who can
beat the market uh by 5% per year and
the extended deviation of stocks is 20%
per year, if you grind through the
statistics on that, it takes 64 years to
get the statistical significance.
>> Well, that that that's quite amazing. He
He called the ad his own advocacy for
index funds an obsession that some
readers found irritating. And when I
read that line, I thought of your quote,
which is your job is to write the same
column week after week after week, but
in a way that neither your readers or
your editors figure out. Um
so, how do you continually write about
indexing um if your readers are finding
it irritating?
>> Well, I think Jonathan
uh arrived at the same place I did. And
of course,
even though he was slightly younger than
me,
he was a couple of years ahead of me
because he he just started on this
topic earlier than I did. But we both
ended up in the same place, which is
you
you keep your message consistent,
but you frame it,
you tell it,
you
ornament it in different ways every
single time. And Jonathan was was
an unparalleled master
at
uh writing what some people, you know,
disparagingly call listicles. Uh Um
he would,
you know, come up with 25 funny things
that
active managers say to justify their
underperformance. And that, you know, he
would run through all these bullet
points, each one of which would be very
funny. And then at the end, he would
say, "And that's why I think you should
put all your money in index funds."
>> I I wonder how many of those lines came
from angry emails from fund managers.
>> Probably a lot of them.
>> Mhm.
So, so one of his core principles is
that successful investing should be
comprehensively,
almost aggressively,
boring, which is kind of ironic.
Both asset management and financial
journalism are unusually noisy,
FOMO-based
industries. So, how do you make a
message stick as an island of
rationality in a sea of noise and and
emotional-driven
stimulus?
>> Silence.
It's that that that's that's that's a
tough one. You you you you become what
Jason has become a master of, which is
saying the same thing in in in in so
many different ways that your editors
and your readers don't notice that
you're saying the same thing over and
over again.
>> Um no doubt about that.
>> And Barry,
sorry, if I can jump in.
You know, I think
one thing that is underappreciated about
somebody like Jonathan
is the amount of
integrity and courage it takes to
stick to a simple message, you know,
the job of
the job of an investigative journalist
is to get people who don't want to talk
to you
to tell you things they don't want you
to know.
>> Mhm.
>> The job of a mainstream journalist
is to tell your readers things that they
need to know whether they want to hear
them or not.
>> Mhm.
>> And
that's what Jonathan was brilliant at.
>> Yeah, and it's it's the the the the
again the word integrity comes up so
many different times when you're talking
about Jonathan. And because here he is
working in a sandbox, you know, active
fund managers,
that's how he pays he's paying his
mortgage and he you know, wakes up one
morning and he says, "This is
intellectually dishonest. I've got to
find something else. I've got to find
some other message." And very few
journalists, I think, make that choice.
They just keep on plugging away and
don't question what they're doing.
>> Mhm. Really interesting. And you know,
we're talking about investing in money,
but Clements emphasized this wasn't
about getting rich, it was about
building a good life. So so
when do you think his thinking shifted
from simple building a portfolio to
something a little more philosophical?
>> I I I think that that happened in the
early 2000s when I think all three of us
started to come across and maybe all
four of us started to come across the
well-being research
that academic neuropsychologists
were were doing.
What makes people happy?
Money is a very small part of that and
that's what Jonathan, you know, made
into, I think, his his mission in
financial journalism was it was
exploring the connection between money
money and happiness. That's not
something that very many financial
journalists
venture into.
>> I I I know there is
more money when you're broke is better
than less money, but it plateaus holding
steady for things like divorce and
illness. It plateaus surprisingly
um rapidly. So So
let let's channel Jonathan for a moment.
Um what is the purpose of money and how
does it help one live a rich fulfilling
life?
>> Well, so Jonathan really explored that
research into hedonic psychology,
particularly
the implications of
does money buy happiness? How do How can
you use money to achieve happiness?
And
there's an an enormous voluminous amount
of research on this in very very obscure
academic journals and it
when Jonathan started working on this
very few
non-academics
were even aware that this research
existed.
But
it
I would say there are there's a handful
of takeaways from that work, that
research.
One is that possessions don't generally
make people happy.
Now, there's exceptions to that. But as
a general rule
the bigger house the fancier car,
um the painting on the wall, the the
bigger couch
generally don't move people's happiness
as much as they expect. And that's
really the key.
Is the difference It's the gap between
what you spend and what you and the
happiness you expect to get from the
spending
that causes the disappointment that
people feel. And you know, I think
everyone listening has had a similar
experience. You know, you
you've been in a starter house, you see
a a new house you love.
You talk about it with your significant
other, you agree we're going to take the
plunge, you buy the house, and you move
in and you're just thrilled, and then,
you know, a year later you look around
and the paint is chipping and, you know,
there's like rats in the attic and
it's more money, more problems, right?
And
uh
the next level beyond that observation
that
possessions
are not the key
is
that
you want to use your money to create
experiences with people you love. Shared
experiences. You want to use money to
create memories.
And so you spend your money on things
you can do with friends and family.
Joint vacations, commemorative events,
family reunions, things like that. And
then there's the final level that
Jonathan explored more and more
in the later years of his life and
especially after he got his terminal
diagnosis, which is using money to
create meaning.
Um finding something bigger than
yourself
that you can support or promote or
strengthen with your money, giving to a
cause you care about. Um
putting something front and center in
your life.
Um
you know,
uh supporting a uh
nonprofit, volunteering.
All of those activities
can really move the needle much more
than you would get if you bought a new
table or
or some other possession you've had your
eye on.
>> Yeah, and he and the thing about
Jonathan was he he lived that ethic
every day of his life. And you know, he
didn't make a lot of money as a
financial journalist. I think he worked
for a couple years at City Corp and made
a pretty decent salary, but you know,
his his his lifetime earnings were not
that high and yet he amassed a
significant amount of assets by
hammering away at being
frugal and and and amassing enough
financial capital so that so that he
didn't have to depend upon his human
capital as as he put it. And I I never
saw him so happy as when he shows up at
our place in Portland having spent $2 to
take the the Max train in from the
airport.
Uh
you know, and then the other thing that
you know, so Jason just just explained
very nicely the the three levels that he
climbed. And I think there was a yet
another level on top of that, which is
to have enough assets uh
to so that you don't have to worry about
assets. In other words, to have In other
words, the ultimate purpose of money I
think for Jonathan was not having to
worry about money.
>> Right. Right. You know, he said
something and I may even be lifting this
from the headline of one of his
um early diagnosis articles, which was
dying is easy, but estate planning and
taking care of your loved ones after
you're gone is hard. And and that struck
me just as such a quirky matter-of-fact
observation about something we all are
going to face at one eventually. He just
had to face it a little earlier
um
and with the sense of humor. Dying, you
know, the old joke about dying is easy,
comedy is hard. No, no, estate planning
and taking care of your loved ones,
that's what's hard.
>> Yeah, I mean, if there was one thing
that that that Jonathan didn't believe,
it's that he who dies with the most toy
wins.
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> So So, let me pull on one little thread,
which is the idea of delayed
gratification, and I already know what
your answer's going to be, but I I have
to pose the question. So, here's
somebody who's diligent about saving,
diligent about postponing that sort of
gratification, and then, unfortunately,
doesn't get the full fruits uh to enjoy
it.
Give us Give us your explanation as to
how and why he was perfectly fine with
that.
>> Well,
so I talked a lot with Jonathan the last
year of his life. Um
you know, I think he called me maybe two
or three weeks after he got
word of his terminal diagnosis.
And the thing that struck me, Barry, was
that
it
you know, having been his friend for
decades,
I could instantly tell
that none of this was an act. You know,
most of us, if we
got a terminal diagnosis, particularly
one like Jonathan's, where he was given
five to I got originally five to 12
months, I think is what they said,
right, Bill?
Um
uh we would put on a brave face. We
would like be faking it for our for our
friends and family.
But
uh
Jonathan was from the very beginning, he
was totally at peace with it. And
I can't tell you that I can totally
explain that.
I think he
I think he meant what he said, which is
he felt he had lived
the best life he could have.
And he had done
everything he wanted. He'd accomplished
most of what he wanted to achieve.
And
he was
somehow he was okay with with
with the news that would just absolutely
devastate most people.
>> Yeah, I mean neuropsychologists use a
personality scale. It's a five-item
scale.
Uh and one of the items is something
called neuroticism, which is basically
how much you focus on the problems in
your your life. And he had a very high
hedonic set point. He was always in a
good mood most of the time. And so his
neuroticism score as far as I can tell
was zero. And he was in a good mood uh
most of the time. So he dealt with his
own mortality
uh as as well as he could. His sense of
humor, my gosh. Um you know, he he he
joked to everybody what a great
marketing strategy uh terminal diagnosis
was if you're trying to flog a book.
>> Mhm. Don't recommend it uh You only get
to use it once, but that is only someone
with a sense of humor uh can say that.
So, let's talk about the book, The Best
of. How did this book come together?
Whose idea was it? What was it like
working on a project with Jonathan
under his awareness of of his terminal
diagnosis?
>> Whose Whose idea Well, I I think I'm I'm
going to look at you and say whose idea
was it. I I think it was I think it I
think it was Jonathan's idea, actually.
>> Yeah, he he just decided he wanted to
put together a compilation. And I think
his his main goal was to raise funds for
a charitable purpose, which it took us a
while to evolve. Uh
and and and that was that was the
project. And so I
>> me just interrupt you. The Jonathan
Clements Getting Going on Savings
Initiative funding Roth IRA
contributions for young adults from
low-income households. That sounds less
like a book tour and more like a policy
intervention.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it it it was and that
was it turned out that that translating
that idea into something practical was a
bit harder than than everybody had
than anybody he realized, but it seemed
like a good idea at the time and so
Jason and I
and Jonathan put together a list of his
columns. I know I think it was Jonathan
who basically gave us the list and Jason
helped me organize it and we
self-published it through through
Amazon. And it has raised a substantial
amount of money for the initiative which
we eventually arrived at. Which I don't
know if we want to talk about that just
yet.
>> Sure, we could talk about it. What what
let's talk a little bit about how much
money did it raise and did anyone have
any targets in mind? Was this Was this
all upside surprise?
>> Yeah, on the order of about $60,000
which
is a substantial amount of money. We
actually raised a lot more money through
the through the Bogle Center
through personal donations that came
into the John C. Bogle Center for
financial literacy.
So, you know, even that that raised a
whole lot more money and and that money
is going into a research project.
Yeah, Jason I never know what J-PAL
stands for. It's
That's That's That's the group the
research group is doing this.
>> Yeah. So, J-PAL is
behavioral economics research institute
based at MIT in Boston.
And um
it's run part uh
partly by Esther Duflo who
uh shared a Nobel Prize in economics in
I want to say 2023.
Uh and J-PAL
does all kinds of interventions
based on behavioral economics research
trying to encourage
people from low-income households around
the world by the way
to form more constructive savings habits
to borrow more prudently
to become long-term investors
and
we partnered with them because
we really felt
that
getting
Jonathan's vision
from an idea
into an actual program
was beyond us we needed help
and so I
J-PAL works with
academics at
universities all all around the world
and um
between
Boston University University of Chicago
and some other Northeastern Northeastern
um
we were able to round up
some some great economists and
researchers to to make the program a
reality and it last summer it was
piloted with
uh
some
basically high school kids in Boston
from poor families
who
were randomly selected to
get money to open a Roth IRA
and we're testing whether there's
particular kinds of messaging
or other techniques that can not only
encourage them to invest but but then to
turn them into investors
by
changing their own behavior over the
long term and it's still very early. We
don't know whether it'll work.
But we hope it will.
And um
even if it fails
we're
pretty confident we'll learn some useful
things about how to
encourage
good long-term investing behavior.
>> Yeah, it turns out it's really hard to
give away money to kids for for for a
Roth IRA.
>> Yep. This is before we passed um I don't
know if you want to call them baby bonds
or Trump accounts or whatever that
thousand-dollar initial tax deferred.
>> It predates that, yeah.
>> So so so with and by the way that dates
back to I'm drawing a blank on his name,
but he's a VC out in um
uh California who first
>> yeah.
>> who first first proposed this, you know,
a decade ago when it was slogging away
trying to get it accepted. So let's
let's Those are what the proceeds are
going to be used for. Let's talk about
the book itself. Um 60
60 columns out of over a thousand, that
has to be a tough list. Anything on the
list um surprise you, make you scratch
your head? What How do you think of the
arc now that you guys helped structure
and organize this?
Which really is half the battle. Once
you have it structured, it becomes a
whole lot easier.
>> Yeah, I I I don't think that Jonathan
had an organizing principle. I think he
just went through his his thousand and
nine columns. Actually, it was more than
that.
Uh to and he picked out just his
favorite ones and then it fell to the
three of us to organize
uh the book uh which which took some
took some work. And it you know, they
were organized according to you know,
the things that John Jonathan wrote
about. I mean you know, the principles
of of indexing, the importance of
saving, uh how to calculate how much
money you need, and then all of the
behavioral uh issues that we that we
talked about. And so I think we came up
with seven or eight basic chapter
headings.
>> But also
Jonathan did something else that
was unusual and frankly risky.
Um which is he wrote
really often about his family and their
issues with money particularly.
He
I don't think Hannah and Henry would
mind my saying this. He sort of used his
kids as guinea pigs
to test out how do you motivate children
to save? How do you get them to become
long-term investors?
And um
uh we did not do this in my household.
Um and on the one hand I'm glad we
didn't because
I think it can make your kids a little
crazy if you
turn them into lab rats.
Um but on the other hand um
his kids probably have a
probably have healthier finances than my
kids do.
>> And healthier financial outlook, too. I
mean my my I'm I'm I'm about a decade
older than nor more than that than than
Jonathan was and so are my kids.
Uh in fact they're considerably older
than his because I had my kids later
than than than he did. And a couple of
the tricks that he came up with I just
thought, "God damn, I wish I'd thought
of that." You know, when your kid asks
for a soda uh that you know, the $4 soda
at the restaurant, it's like, "I'll give
you a buck if you take the water." You
know, I thought, "God damn, I might be
I'd be I'd be richer if I you know, I'd
I'd probably have a couple grand I'd
have a I'd be a couple grand richer if
I'd thought of that one first."
>> That That's a great parenting hack.
Share some others. What other financial
tricks
uh was he using that ended up having a
good impact on the on the children?
Either of you.
>> Well, the Bank of Mom and Dad, he closed
that.
So, instead of you know,
you know, opening your wallet for the
endless supply of five and 10s and 20s
when they wanted something,
you know, at age 11 or 12, he gave them
ATM cards that he would load up,
you know, at the beginning of the month
and then when the money was gone, the
money was gone and
>> That's it till the next month.
>> Yeah, and and that's that's that's a
great trick.
>> I I got to imagine a lot of parents are
listening to this and saying, "Closing
the bank of mom and dad?" What happens
when they burn through the ATM in week
one? Now you have three weeks of
whining. How do you How do you manage
around that?
>> Yeah, that's that's tough. That's tough
nuggies.
>> Yeah, you just you ignore the whining.
>> Yeah.
>> Apparently. Plan better next month and
we won't be having this conversation.
That That's really That's really pretty
amazing. So, it appears to me that
Jonathan spent a big part of his career,
and I always hate this word, but
democratizing
good financial advice.
It sounds like this initiative is the
culmination of all of that
and and maybe further cuz he's trying to
reach people that are normally
completely ignored by the
wealth management and and mutual funds
world.
>> Yeah, I I mean we we you know,
part of the problem that we have is is
the behavioral problem of getting people
to to save
and hopefully,
you know, this initiative, this research
project will shed a little bit of light
on that
that will that will help people,
you know, save in their own for their
for their own retirement both through
employer plans and on their own.
>> So, so let's talk a little bit about the
behavior gap. Both of you have written
about this. Jonathan has written
extensively about it.
Essentially, it's what people
know they should do and then what they
end up doing despite knowing what they
should do.
Um How how do we
how do we contextualize
this behavior gap
from Jonathan's perspective?
>> Well,
I think Jonathan did something really
important which is
um
there was a firm which I won't name
that in the
90s used to say that the behavior gap
was
oh 7%
a year
for people who didn't use stock brokers
to buy their mutual funds.
And um
in other words, if you were willing to
pay a an upfront sales charge to buy a
mutual fund, you would end up earning a
much higher return than somebody who
didn't go through a stock broker.
>> Does the math bear that out?
>> The math does not bear that out.
>> No.
No, no, no, no.
>> The the behavior gap is real.
But it's in nowhere near that big.
>> Two to three percent, something along
those lines? I remember
>> Probably a little smaller.
>> I remember Vanguard study
that specifically said for people for
people who have behavior issues, it's
worth paying half a percent or 1% to
somebody if it prevents them from making
3 4% um
in errors. I'm talking my book, they
were talking their book. How do you
perceive um the ability for someone to
talk an investor off the ledge when
every instinct in their body is like,
"No, no, we want to sell now cuz in
March '09 or March 2020, this is going
to get much worse than it is right now."
>> Yeah, that's that's that's a completely
separate issue than what we're talking
about. I mean, you know, what we're
talking about is what is what is the gap
and the answer is it's not 7 or 8% it's
closer to 1% or 1 or 1 or 1 and 1/2%
which is less than the cost of engaging
conventional
advice certainly through a full-service
financial institution. The other the
other the other issue which you're
asking is how do you prevent people from
jumping off the ledge and the answer is
that's very hard to do because you have
to be able to impart a sense of
financial history to people which is
something that maybe one out of 50
investors takes seriously. That's
>> That low the numbers are that low cuz
I'm I'm thinking about your quote about
managing your own limbic system. If you
can't do that you're going to die poor.
Tell us about how all these columns and
the book from Jonathan.
>> Well, the limbic system very very
crudely is is is system one. It's the
fast-moving system that you know it
engages when we when we see the when we
hear the hiss of the snake or the see
the yellow and
black stripes in our peripheral vision
on the African savannas.
We overcome it with our system two which
is our our thinking part of the brain
the neocortex basically and the
neocortex has to learn something about
financial history
and good luck with that.
>> Well, good luck with not only teaching
it but it seems that the half-life of
financial literacy is really short that
even if you teach people stuff you got
to keep drumming it in because events
seem to move so fast people kind of
forget pretty quickly.
>> people
you know do learn when they get hit over
the head by a 2 by 4 which they did in
08.
And
you know Einstein is supposed to have
said that the most powerful force in the
universe is compound interest which of
course he never said but the but the
most powerful force in the financial
universe is amnesia. So people people
forget.
>> What's the Galbraith quote? The one
thing we learn about financial history
is no one learns from financial
history." So, it it's really true. So,
so let's talk a little bit about this
book starting with
First of all, who gets a terminal
diagnosis and says, "I know, I will
write a book." I mean, every one of us
at this table have written more than one
books, and I think we would all admit
they're kind of a slog.
Where did this come from? What was the
motivation here?
>> You know, Jonathan never
told He didn't tell me he was doing it.
I don't know if he told you, Bill.
>> No, he did not.
>> I I only found out about it
several months after he died.
And um
I think it was part of
how he coped with
knowing that
you know, he his time
was limited. He He just wanted to make
the most of the time he had left. He
spent a large part of every day
with family and friends and, you know,
creating new memories that
the people who remained behind when she
when he was gone would
be able to cherish.
But, I think he also spent part of every
day
doing what he liked best, which was
writing.
>> Yeah, were you to ask Jonathan
who he was and what he did, he would say
first of all, it's about my my family.
Uh
and then secondly, who I am is is a
writer. And he could no sooner stop
uh writing
as as as as if he could stop breathing.
>> Mhm.
So, so the book Money and Me combines a
lot of writing he did at The Humble
Dollar
uh as well as some fairly personal
reflections on his diagnosis.
Um is this book very different in tone
and
goals and ambitions and his earlier
writings? What what are your thoughts on
this?
>> Yeah, it's a biography. It's an
autobiography.
>> It's a biography, but I having not read
it yet, I suspect it's a biography with
a lot of um
insightful lessons learned along the
way.
>> Yeah, we covered a lot of those in the
the first segment of of the interview,
which is you know, what's what's money
for, what's life all about,
uh what's the meaning what's the meaning
of life?
Uh
you know, that's that's that's what he
wanted to approach. He wanted to put a
coda on to his life and I think that's
that's what the book was for.
>> A coda.
>> Yeah, I mean I I I've been thinking a
lot about this um because I'm I
mentioned
Jonathan and
the writing he did at the end of his
life in a book I'm
I've just finished of my own.
And the way I sort of
came out was that I think
Jonathan
took heart from giving heart. He gave
heart to so many people in the last year
of his life by writing incredibly
candidly about
what is it like to know you're dying?
You know,
what do you have to do
before you're done? And how do you go
about accomplishing everything you want
to achieve in the very limited time
that's left to you
while retaining your dignity, while
spending time with the people you love,
and how do you how do you set those
priorities?
And um how do you how do you put all
that in context? And Jonathan got not
hundreds, but thousands of emails and
letters
from people who were dying, people who
were taking care of loved ones who were
dying,
people whose loved ones had died,
people who were afraid of death,
um people who had gotten a terminal
diagnosis and then gone into remission
or been cured completely.
And over and over again,
those people
just it wasn't this incredible
outpouring of gratitude and love. And
you know, the thing that I think is the
biggest tribute to Jonathan is
you know, in the writing that I did
about him in the last year of his life,
uh in my column and also in the
newsletter I do for the Wall Street
Journal, I got
I easily got three or 400 emails myself.
And the single most common thing
that readers said about Jonathan was,
"He was my friend."
And they said that even though none of
them had ever met him.
They all said he was he was my friend.
And
it was true, he was. Because he really
cared about
the average person. He he loved his
readers, even the ones he'd never met.
And he understood that
you know, when you're an individual
investor, you're you're just like this
little piece of plankton
in a sea of
sharks and and barracudas. And you're at
the bottom of the food chain.
And Jonathan was their advocate. And
then when he got that terminal
diagnosis, he realized he could be an
advocate for an entirely new
group of people. You know, those who
have been touched by
by terminal illness.
>> Yeah, you
he had a he had an ability that almost
no journalist has, which is that you
read him and you say this man knows
my life.
Uh and he even before he got his
terminal diagnosis, uh you know, he
quits Citicorp uh around 2018
or no, 2014 or so and he and he says,
"Well, what am I going to do? I'm going
to give back." And he so he founds
Humble Dollar,
uh which, you know, continues publishing
even after after he's gone. So, he's
created something that's that's still,
you know, was was very useful while he
was publishing it and it's still
uh providing a service. So, you know,
that I mean that his his life was
service more than anything else.
>> So, so let's talk a little bit about
service, not just to his readers, but to
his family.
So, if you preach delayed gratification
and then you realize, "Hey, that window
is only small." Um you then want some of
that gratification.
When I interviewed him after his
diagnosis,
he was planning a number of events and
travel and other sorts of things with
his family. Tell us a little bit about
what he got to do in the last year of
his life that he might have postponed
under different circumstances until
years later.
>> Right.
Yeah, I mean, uh obviously, you know, we
should be respectful of Jonathan's
privacy, but I think I can share most of
this.
>> He did he did discuss a lot of it and
I'm assuming some of this is in the
book. So, I'm not asking for secrets.
Tell us what what he was public about.
>> mean, uh
his son
uh
was planning to get engaged and got
engaged and got married and Jonathan and
his wife Elaine got to
travel to London to you know go to the
wedding. Jonathan himself
uh
accelerated his engagement and marriage
to Elaine his his wife.
Um he did all he did he organized those
things knowing that they were important
to him and his family.
And
um he also went on
a bunch of trips with his mom and
and his siblings
and um you know he had to cancel a
couple of trips because he would at
various points he was too sick to
travel.
But
uh
his siblings and and kids would meet in
Philadelphia. They would meet uh
they went to a couple other places
together.
And he just maximized
the amount of time that he spent with
with his family but also with his
friends. I mean
I visited him twice.
Uh an another mutual friend of ours from
our days at Forbes magazine
uh went with me on one of those visits.
>> Is this to London?
>> No no to Philadelphia.
>> Uh-huh.
>> Um unfortunately
to to Philadelphia. Philadelphia's great
don't get me wrong. I love Philly.
Um but London is maybe more is more fun
maybe for an American anyway.
Um but uh
he
it and I guess
the thing I would point out because I
saw this first hand
is that that may not sound like that big
a deal to most people
listening or watching us. You know sort
of like oh yeah your time is limited so
speed stuff up and make it happen. Uh
making it happen isn't
as easy as it sounds. I mean,
you know, you're getting chemo, you're
getting radiation therapy,
you're getting, you know,
uh,
surgical cement squirted into your
spine.
Um,
you're, you know, you're getting cut
open for this thing or that thing.
Uh,
you know, your hair is falling out.
Eventually, you know, walking is
difficult. And through all of that,
Jonathan was like, "Yeah, come on, you
know, come next Tuesday."
Uh, you know, "I got nothing but time."
You know.
>> Yeah.
Nothing but nothing but time when you're
We all have limited time and and he
knows pretty pretty realistically,
uh, how short that is. Um, it sounds
like this could be a morbid or
depressing category, but, uh,
but knowing
how he discussed things after his
diagnosis, I have a sneaking suspicion
that this book is more uplifting, um,
than depressing. Tell us a little bit
about the tone he takes in what most of
us would think of as really difficult
circumstances.
>> Well, most of the book
doesn't cover his his terminal illness.
That's maybe five That's maybe 10 or 15%
of the book and he does a beautiful job
of describing just what what Jason did.
What he's really describing is his
journey, uh,
through the relationship between money
and and happiness.
Uh,
and and how he arrived at the place that
he that he that he did. Um, you know,
the the thing that that struck me when
when I would go to visit him was and and
talk to him on the phone was, you know,
I've in in in in the practice of
medicine, I spent a lot of time talking
to dying patients.
Uh and he was just the easiest person to
talk to. You would you would you would
get off the phone with him, you would
come off away from a visit with him, you
would feel uplifted. Uh that's I can
tell you that's not true most of the
time.
>> And does that translate into the book?
>> Yes.
>> Yeah, I mean, what what I would jump in
with Barry is that I think the
it I mean, it may sound like a strange
word, but
the word I guess I would use is joy. I
mean
uh a
Jonathan
talked about talked and wrote about
dying
from
the most positive perspective you could
possibly imagine.
I and
you know,
uh
it's as if he really felt that he had
lived the life he wanted to live.
And
above all, he wanted to
go out on a high note.
And he wanted to bring everybody along
with him.
>> Yeah. That was his great gift and his
great endowment. We talked a bit about
hedonic set point. Uh you know, he just
wasn't a glass half full kind of guy. He
was a glass 7/8 full kind of guy.
>> Well, just that headline, I don't
remember if it was the Journal or the
Times piece.
Dying is easy, planning for death is
hard just is is filled with that sort of
mischievous sense of humor about
something that everybody else takes very
seriously. And when confronted with it,
it's like, "Hey, you got no choice but
to laugh and plow ahead." And and that
seems to be what he did.
>> Yeah, I mean, one of the lines
he used that I'll never forget is
uh
and it was maybe the second to last
phone conversation I had with him.
He said, you know, when when I got my
original diagnosis, they told me I had 5
to 12 months to live.
And that was
I want Mhm. Now, I may not be
remembering correctly. I think I think
at the time he was talking with me, it
was maybe 13 months prior.
And he said, so I, you know, I'm
I'm already playing in overtime.
And I mean, I burst out laughing, just
the way you did.
My friend is dying and I'm laughing, but
I'm laughing with him.
>> As he cracks jokes about it.
>> Yes. And and he wasn't it wasn't like if
that if that had been me, I might have
been joking, but I would have been
joking to like cover my fear and
whatever. And he was joking because he
thought it was funny.
>> Yeah.
So so there's a line from Howard Marks
that I suspect
reflects a lot of what's within this
book. And I'm just curious as to your
thoughts. Um experience is what we get
when we don't get what we want.
>> Mhm.
>> And in the journey of
the overlap between happiness and money
and that Venn diagram, which has I
suspect less overlap than most people
realize until they get that experience,
which might not be what they wanted. Um
how how has his journey evolved? How has
his perspective, Jonathan's
perspectives, changed
about his thought his thoughts about
money, happiness, and and the purpose of
living a rich life?
>> Yeah, I mean, I I I think he started out
as a young man, the way he describes in
the book, with a conventional
view of money, which is that, you know,
money is to to buy things and to help
you get by
in in life. When he started out his his
career in journalism, he had credit card
debt, he had student debt,
and you know, probably all that he was
thinking about was getting out from from
under that. And unlike most people, he
evolved beyond that very very very
quickly
to you know, get to the higher the
higher uses of money that we've been
talking about.
Anything to add to that?
>> I mean, I guess
maybe the
thing I would add, Barry, is just
um
that
it takes a lot after all the years that
I've been doing financial journalism to
get me to
feel
I really learned something important.
>> Mhm.
>> Um
because I've sort of I I guess I haven't
seen it all, but I've seen most of it.
And
I really learned from Jonathan that, you
know,
uh
how you live
under
sort of the ordinary conditions of daily
life
um is one thing, but how you live when
you've got a death sentence is something
else. And he really shows
that um you know, you can still
celebrate.
And and you should.
And you should figure out how to comfort
the people who love you in a way that
will always console them after you're
gone.
And
you know,
the book really shows that
of course we're all afraid of dying, but
we're probably afraid of it for the
wrong reasons.
And and I think
what Jonathan really showed is the thing
you should be afraid of about dying is
going out the wrong way.
>> Mhm.
>> Like not giving the people who will live
after you
the positive things
that you can give them as gifts, and
that's what he did.
>> Yeah, and the the other thing which he
was was aware of is you know, he he
realized he was a very positive person
and that he was
dealing with his terminal illness as
well as any person could, and he was
much more acutely aware of how much
harder it was for the people around him.
And he talked about that a lot. But
about about how hard it was particularly
on his on his kids.
>> Mhm.
>> That that makes perfect sense.
Um so so last question um if Jonathan
were here, what do you think he would
want the takeaway to be from the book
about the relationship between money and
a life well lived?
>> He would tell you to figure out who the
heck you are and what you really enjoy
doing, and that's what the money is for.
>> Sound Sounds wise. Jason, you want to
>> I I have I have nothing to add.
>> Did we Did we miss anything? Is there
something I haven't brought up that you
guys Cuz I don't want this to be a
morbid conversation.
>> Mhm.
>> It we're we're all solemn, but I know
each of you
have a um
a long and and positive relationship
with Jonathan.
>> Mhm.
>> Um so I don't want this all to come
across as morbid cuz
just because it involves death, it
doesn't mean it's sad or morbid. What
What else do you want listeners to take
away from Jonathan's life, his work, his
books? What What should people be aware
that this isn't a downbeat book, this
isn't depressing.
>> No.
>> We're We're being respectful, but at the
same time he was a a happy, joyful
person. We don't want to
>> get into anything that's morbid, but you
know, when I was in My dad died when I
was in college, when I was
22.
And I remember
the thing that
he was most worried about as as he as he
lay dying, cuz he he died of lung
cancer, he kept saying to me, "I don't
want you to remember me like this."
You know, as as a sick person. And I
kept saying to him, "I'm not going to
remember you like this."
And I couldn't know that that was true.
>> Mhm.
>> But it was. I don't remember my dad
as a sick person. I remember him as this
incredibly vital,
physically strong, you know, mentally
agile
impressive person. And
uh what I will always remember about
Jonathan is every time I think of him, I
hear him laughing. That's the first
thing
that comes in my head is is He didn't
just laugh, he cackled.
And
um his laughter was contagious.
it never stopped. The last conversation
I had with him, he was laughing at
himself
at
how, you know, dying was such a a weird
thing and
you know, if people only knew what it
was like, they, you know,
>> They wouldn't fear it.
>> They wouldn't.
>> Or they would fear it less. Well Well,
gentlemen,
I really appreciate you guys coming in
to talk about the life and times of of
Jonathan Clements. It was a
absolutely
a unique life, one that left behind
a tremendous legacy for all of his not
just friends and family, but readers.
The ability to touch tens of thousands
of people and in a very positive way is
a very very rare thing. I hope people
appreciate
the conversation
not as a morbid remembrance, but as a a
hopeful and uplifting one for somebody
who left a very positive mark behind.
Yeah. Well, thank you, gentlemen, for
being so generous with your time. We
have been speaking with Jason Zweig and
William Bernstein
remembering the life, times, and
writings of Jonathan Clements in
anticipation of his final book, Money
and Me, coming out May 26th, 2026.
I would be remiss if I didn't thank the
crack team that helps put these
conversations together each week. Alexis
Noriega is my video producer. Sean Russo
is my researcher. Anna Luke is my
podcast producer.
I'm Barry Ritholtz. You've been
listening to Masters in Business on
Bloomberg Radio.